What is the status of serverless computing and Python in 2024?
What are some of the new tools and best practices?
Well, we're lucky to have Tony Sherman,
who has a lot of practical experience
with serverless programming on the show.
This is "Talk Python To Me," episode 458,
recorded January 25th, 2024.
(upbeat music)
Welcome to "Talk Python To Me," a weekly podcast on Python.
This is your host, Michael Kennedy.
Follow me on Mastodon, where I'm @mkennedy,
and follow the podcast using @talkpython,
both on fosstodon.org.
Keep up with the show and listen to over seven years
of past episodes at talkpython.fm.
We've started streaming most of our episodes live on YouTube.
Subscribe to our YouTube channel
over at talkpython.fm/youtube
to get notified about upcoming shows
and be part of that episode.
This episode is brought to you by Sentry.
Don't let those errors go unnoticed.
Use Sentry like we do here at Talk Python.
Sign up at talkpython.fm/sentry.
And it's brought to you by Mailtrap,
an email delivery platform that developers love.
Try for free at mailtrap.io.
Tony, welcome to Talk Python to me.
- Thank you.
Thanks for having me.
- Fantastic to have you here.
Gonna be really fun to talk about serverless.
You know, the joke with the cloud is,
well, I know you call it the cloud,
but it's really just somebody else's computer.
But we're not even talking about computers,
we're just talking about functions.
Maybe it's someone else's function.
I don't know, we're gonna find out.
- Yeah, I actually,
I saw a recent article about server-free.
Recently, somebody trying to, yeah, move completely.
Yes, yeah, because as you might know,
serverless doesn't mean actually no servers.
- Of course, of course.
Server-free, all right.
So we could just get the thing
to run on the BitTorrent network.
Got it, okay.
- Yeah.
- I don't know, I don't know, we'll figure it out.
But it's gonna be super fun.
We're gonna talk about your experience
working with serverless.
We'll talk about some of the choices people have out there
and also some of the tools that we can use
to do things like observe and test our serverless code.
Before that though, tell us a bit about yourself.
- Sure, so I'm actually a career changer.
So I worked in the cable industry for about 10 years
and doing a lot of different things
from installing, knock at the door cable guy
to working on more of the outside plant.
But it just, at some point,
I was seeing limits of career path there.
And so my brother-in-law is a software engineer
and I had already started going back to school,
finishing my degree and I was like,
okay, well maybe I should look into this.
And so I took an intro to programming class.
It was in Python and that just led me down this path.
So now for the past four years or so,
been working professionally in the software world,
started out in a QA role at an IOT company.
And now, yeah, doing a lot of serverless programming
in Python these days.
Second company now,
but that does some school bus safety products.
- Interesting, very cool.
- Yeah, yep.
But a lot of Python and a lot of serverless.
- Well, serverless and IOT,
feel like they go pretty hand in hand.
- Yes, yep.
Yeah, another thing is with serverless
is when you have very like spiky traffic,
like if you think about school buses
that you have a lot coming on twice a day.
- Exactly, like the 8 a.m. shift
and then the 2.30 to 3.00 shift.
- So yeah, that's a really good use case for serverless
is something like that.
- Okay, are you enjoying doing the programming stuff?
So the cable stuff?
- Absolutely.
Sometimes I live in Michigan,
so I look outside and look at the snow coming down
or these storms and yeah, I just,
yeah, I really, some people are like,
you don't miss being outside?
I'm like, maybe every once in a while,
but I can go walk outside on a nice day.
- You can choose to go outside.
You're not ready to go outside in the sleet or rain.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, absolutely.
We just had a mega storm here
and just the huge tall trees here in Oregon
just fell left and right.
And there's in every direction that I look,
there's a large tree on top of one of the houses
of my neighbors, maybe a house or two over.
But it just took out all the,
everything that was a cable in the air was taken out.
So it's just been a swarm of people
who are out in 13 degree Fahrenheit,
negative nine Celsius weather.
And I'm thinking,
not really choosing to be out there today probably.
Excellent.
Well, thanks for that introduction.
I guess maybe we could,
a lot of people probably know what serverless is,
but I'm sure there's a lot who are not even really aware
of what serverless programming is, right?
- Yes.
- Let's talk about what's the idea,
what's the zen of this?
- Yeah.
So yeah, I kind of made the joke that serverless
doesn't mean there are no servers,
but, and there's, hopefully I don't butcher it too much,
but it's more like functions as a service.
There's other things that can be serverless too.
Like there's serverless databases
or a lot of different services that can be serverless,
meaning you don't have to think about like
how to operate them,
how to think about scaling them up.
You don't have to spin up VMs
or Kubernetes clusters or anything.
You don't have to think about that part.
It's just your code that goes into it.
And so yeah, serverless functions
are probably what people are most familiar with.
And that's, I'm sure what we'll talk about most today.
But yeah, that's really the idea.
You don't have to manage the server.
- Sure.
And that's a huge barrier.
I remember when I first started getting into web apps
and programming and then another level
when I got into Python,
because I had not done that much Linux work,
getting stuff up running, it was really tricky.
And then having the concern of, is it secure?
How do I patch it?
How do I back it up?
How do I keep it going?
All of those things, they're non-trivial, right?
- Right.
Yeah, yeah.
There's a lot to think about.
And if you like work at an organization,
it's probably different everywhere you go too,
that how they manage their servers and things.
So putting in some stuff in the cloud
kind of brings some commonality to it too.
Like you can learn how the Azure cloud or Google cloud
or AWS, how those things work
and kind of have some common ground too.
- Yeah, for sure.
Like having, also feels more accessible
to the developers in a larger group,
in the sense that it's not a DevOps team
that kind of takes care of the servers
or a production engineers where you hand them your code.
It's a little closer to just, I have a function
and then I get it up there
and it continues to be the function, you know?
- Yeah, and that is a different mindset too.
You kind of see it all the way through
from writing your code to deploying it.
Yeah, without maybe an entire DevOps team
that you just kind of say, here you go, go deploy this.
- Yeah.
In my world, I mostly have virtual machines.
I've moved over to kind of a Docker cluster.
I think I've got 17 different things
running in the Docker cluster at the moment,
but both of those are really different
than serverless, right?
- Yeah.
- Yeah, so it's been working well for me,
but when I think about serverless,
let me know if this is true.
It feels like you don't need to have as much of a Linux
or server or sort of an ops experience
to create these things.
- Yeah, I would say like you could probably get away
with like almost none, right?
Like at the simplest form,
like with like AWS, for instance, their Lambda functions,
you can, and that's the one I'm most familiar with.
So forgive me for using them as an example for everything.
There's a lot of different serverless options,
but you could go into the AWS console
and you could actually write your Python code
right in the console, deploy that.
They have function URLs now.
So you could actually have like,
I mean, within a matter of minutes,
you can have a serverless function set up.
And so, yeah.
- AWS Lambda, right?
That's the one. - Yes, yep.
- Lambda being, I guess, a simple function, right?
We have Lambdas in Python.
They can only be one line.
I'm sure you can have more than one line in the AWS Lambda.
- Yeah, there are limitations though
with Lambda that are definitely some pain points
that I ran into, so.
- Oh, really?
Okay, what are some of the limitations?
- Yeah, so package size is one.
So if you start thinking about all these
like amazing packages on PyPI,
you do have to start thinking about
how many you're gonna bring in.
So, and I don't know the exact limits off the top of my head,
but it's, yeah, pretty quick Google search
on their package size.
It might be like 50 megabytes zipped,
but 250 when you decompress it to do a zip base,
then they do have containerized Lambda functions
that go up to like a 10 gig limit.
So that helps, but.
- Interesting, okay.
- Yeah, yeah, those ones used to be less performant,
but they're kind of catching up to where they're,
that was really on something called cold starts,
but they're getting, I think, pretty close to it,
not being a very big difference
whether you dockerize or zip these functions,
but yeah, so when you start just like pip install
and everything, you've got to think about
how to get that code into your function
and how much it's gonna bring in.
So yeah, that definitely was a limitation
that I had to quickly learn.
- Yeah, I guess it's probably trying to do
pip install -r effectively.
- Yeah.
- And it's like, you can't go overboard with this, right?
- Right, yeah, yeah.
When you start bringing in packages,
like maybe like some of the scientific packages,
you're definitely gonna be hitting some size limits.
- Okay, and with the containerized ones,
basically you probably give it a Docker file
and a command to run in it,
and it can build those images before
and then just execute and just do a Docker run.
- Yeah, I think how those ones work
is you store an image on like their container registry,
Amazon's, is it ECR, I think.
And so then you kind of point it at that
and yeah, it'll execute your like handler function
when the Lambda gets called, so.
- This portion of Talk Python to Me
is brought to you by
Multi-Platform Error Monitoring at Sentry.
Code breaks, it's a fact of life.
With Sentry, you can fix it faster.
Does your team or company work
on multiple platforms that collaborate?
Chances are extremely high that they do.
It might be a React or Vue front-end JavaScript app
that talks to your FastAPI backend services.
Could be a Go microservice
talking to your Python microservice,
or even native mobile apps
talking to your Python backend APIs.
Now let me ask you a question.
Whatever combination of these that applies to you,
how tightly do these teams work together?
Especially if there are errors
originating at one layer,
but becoming visible at the other.
It can be super hard to track these errors
across platforms and devices,
but Sentry has you covered.
They support many JavaScript front-end frameworks,
obviously Python backend, such as FastAPI and Django,
and they even support native mobile apps.
For example, at Talk Python,
we have Sentry integrated into our mobile apps
for our courses.
Those apps are built and compiled
in native code with Flutter.
With Sentry, it's literally a few lines of code
to start tracking those errors.
Don't fly blind.
Fix code faster with Sentry.
Create your Sentry account at talkpython.fm/sentry.
And if you sign up with the code TALKPYTHON,
one word, all caps,
it's good for two free months of Sentry's business plan,
which will give you up to 20 times as many monthly events,
as well as some other cool features.
My thanks to Sentry for supporting Talk Python to me.
- Yeah, so out in the audience,
Kim says, "AWS does make a few packages available directly
just by default in Lambda."
That's kind of nice.
- Yeah, yep.
So yeah, Bodo, which if you're dealing with AWS and Python,
you're using the Bodo package.
And yeah, that's included for you.
So that's definitely helpful in any of their,
transitive dependencies would be there.
I think Bodo used to even include like requests,
but then I think they eventually dropped that
with some like SSL stuff.
But yeah, you definitely,
you can't just like pip install anything
and not think of it,
unless depending on how you package these up.
So. - Sure.
Sure, that makes sense.
Of course they would include their own Python libraries.
Right?
- Yeah, and it's not a,
yeah, it's not exactly small.
I think like Bodo core used to be like 60 megabytes,
but I think they've done some work to really get that down.
So.
- Yeah, yeah, that's, yeah, that's not too bad.
I feel like Bodo core, Bodo three,
those are constantly changing, like constantly.
- Yeah, yeah, well, as fast as AWS ad services,
that they'll probably keep changing quickly.
- Yeah, I feel like those are auto-generated maybe,
just from looking at the way the API looks at it,
you know, the way they look written.
And so. - Yeah, yeah.
That's probably the case, yeah.
I know they do that with like their,
their infrastructure is code CDK,
it's all like TypeScript originally,
and then you have your Python bindings for it and so.
- Right, right, right, right.
I mean, it makes sense, but at the same time,
when you see a change, it doesn't necessarily mean,
oh, there's a new important aspect added,
it's probably just, I don't know,
people have actually pulled up the console for AWS,
but just the amount of services that are there.
And then each one of those has its own full API,
like a little bit of the one of those.
So we regenerated it, but it might be for some part
that you never, never call, right?
Like you might only work with S3 and it's only changed,
I don't know, EC2 stuff, right?
- Right, yep, exactly.
- Yeah, indeed.
All right, well, let's talk real quickly
about some of the places where we could do serverless, right?
You've mentioned AWS Lambda.
- Yep.
- And I also maybe touch on
just 1 million requests free per month.
That's pretty cool. - Yeah, yeah.
So yeah, getting like jumping into AWS
sometimes sounds scary,
but they have a pretty generous free tier.
Definitely do your research on some of the security of this,
but yeah, you can, a million requests free per month.
You probably have to look into that a little bit
because it's, you have your memory configurations too.
So there's probably, I don't know exactly how that works
within their free tier, but you're charged like,
with Lambda at least it's your like invocation time
and memory and also amount of requests.
So yeah.
- I'm always confused when I look at that and go,
okay, with all of those variables,
is that a lot or a little, I know it's a lot,
but it's hard for me to conceptualize like,
well, I use a little more memory than I thought.
So it costs like, wait a minute,
how do I know how much memory I use?
You know, like. - Yeah.
- What does this mean in practice?
- And it's actually, yeah,
it's built by how you configure it too.
So if you say I need a Lambda with 10 gigs of memory,
you're being built at that like 10 gigabyte price threshold.
So there is a really, a really cool tool called PowerTooth
or AWS Lambda PowerTuner.
So yeah, what that'll do is you can,
it creates a state machine in AWS.
Yeah, I think I did send you a link to that one.
So the PowerTuner will create a state machine
that invocates your Lambda
with several different memory configurations.
And you can say,
I want either the best cost optimized version
or the best performance optimized version.
So, and that'll tell you, like, it'll say,
okay, yeah, you're best with a Lambda configured at,
you know, 256 megabytes, you know, for memory.
So, sorry, yeah, for the link, it's,
this is PowerTools.
This is a different amazing package.
Maybe I didn't send you the PowerTuner.
I should, okay, sorry.
- It's news to me.
I'll look and see. - Okay, sorry, yeah.
And they have similar names.
- Yeah, there's only so many ways to describe stuff.
- Right, yeah, okay.
They have it right in their AW, yep.
- And it is an open source package.
So there's probably a GitHub link in there, but yeah.
And this will tell you like the best way
to optimize your Lambda function,
at least as far as memory is concerned.
So, yeah, really good tool.
It gives you a visualization,
gives you a graph that will say like,
okay, here's kind of where cost and performance meet.
And so, yeah, it's really excellent
for figuring that out.
Yeah, at least in AWS land.
I don't know if some of the other cloud providers
have something similar to this,
but yeah, it's definitely a really helpful tool.
- Sure, yeah.
Like I said, I'm confused
and I've been doing cloud stuff for a long time
when I look at it.
- Yeah, so, well, there's some interesting things here.
So like you can actually have a Lambda invocation
that costs less with a higher memory configuration
because it'll run faster.
So you're, I think Lambda bills like by the millisecond now.
So you can actually, because it runs faster,
it can be cheaper to run.
So. - Well, that explains
all the rust that's been getting written.
- Yeah, yeah.
- There's a real number behind this.
I mean, we need to go faster, right?
Okay, so, I think maybe AWS Lambda
is one of the very first ones as well
to come on with this concept of serverless.
- Yeah, I don't know for sure, but it probably is.
And then, yeah, your other big cloud providers have them.
And now you're actually even seeing them come up
with a lot of like Vercel has some type
of serverless function.
I don't know what they're using behind it,
but it's almost like they just put a nicer UI
around AWS Lambda or whichever cloud provider
that's potentially backing this up.
But yeah.
- They're just reselling their flavor
of somebody else's cloud, yeah.
- Yeah, it could be because, yeah,
Vercel obviously they have a really nice suite
of products with a good UI, very usable.
So, yeah.
- Okay, so Vercel, some of them people can try.
And then we've got the two other hyperscale clouds,
I guess you call them.
Google Cloud has serverless, right?
- Yep.
- Okay, so.
- I'm not sure which ones,
they might just be called Cloud Functions.
And yeah, Azure also has.
- They got Cloud Run and Cloud Functions.
I have no idea what the difference is though.
- Yep, and yeah, Azure also has a serverless product.
And I'd imagine there's probably like even more
that we're not aware of, but yeah,
it's kind of nice to not think about
setting up servers for something, so.
- I think maybe, is it FaaS?
Yeah, Function as a Service, let's see.
- Yeah.
- But if we search for FaaS instead of PaaS or IaaS, right?
There's, oh, we've got Almeda, Intel.
I saw that IBM had some.
Oh, there's also, we've got Digital Ocean.
I'm a big fan of Digital Ocean
because I feel like their pricing is really fair
and they've got good documentation and stuff.
So they've got functionless, sorry, serverless functions
that you can, I don't use these.
- Yeah, I haven't used these either, but yeah.
And yeah, as far as costs,
especially for small personal projects and things
where you don't need to have a server on all the time,
they're, yeah, pretty nice if you have a website
that you need something server side
where you gotta have some Python,
but you don't need a server going all the time.
Yeah, it's-
- Okay, like maybe I have a static site,
but then I want this one thing to happen
if somebody clicks a button, something like that.
- Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
Yep, you could be completely static,
but have something that is, yeah,
yeah, that one function call that you do need, yeah.
- Exactly.
And then you also pointed out that Cloudflare
has some form of serverless.
- Yeah, and I haven't used these either,
but yeah, I do know that they have some type of,
functions as a service as well, so.
- I don't know what frameworks for languages,
they let you write them in there.
I use bunny.net for my CDN,
just absolutely awesome platform.
I really, really love it.
And one of the things that they've started offering,
I can get this stupid, completely useless cookie banner
to go away, is they've offered what they call edge compute.
- Oh, yeah, okay.
- What you would do, I don't know where to find it,
somewhere maybe, but basically the CDN has 115,
120 points of presence all over the world where,
this one's close to Brazil,
this one's close to Australia, whatever.
But you can actually run serverless functions
on those things, like, so you deploy them,
so the code actually executes in 115 locations.
- Yes, yeah.
- Probably Cloudflare or something like that as well,
but I don't know.
- Yeah, AWS has, they have like Lambda at edge,
at the edge, so that's kind of goes hand in hand
with their like CDN CloudFront, I believe, yeah.
So they have something similar like that,
where you have a Lambda that's gonna be,
perform it because it's distributed across their CDN.
- Yeah, CDNs, that's a whole nother world.
They're getting really advanced.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, so we won't, maybe that's a different show,
it's not a show today, but it's just the idea of like,
you distribute the compute on the CDN, it's pretty nice.
The drawback is it's just JavaScript, which is okay,
but it's not the same as--
- Right, yes, yeah.
- Wonder if you could do HighScript.
- Oh, yeah, that's an interesting thought, yeah.
- Yeah, we're getting closer and closer
to Python in the browser, so.
- Yeah, my JavaScript includes
this little bit of WebAssembly,
and I don't like semicolons, but go ahead and run it anyway.
- Yeah.
- Out in the audience, it looks like CloudFlare
probably does support Python, which is awesome.
- Yeah, yeah, there's so many options out there
for serverless functions that are, yeah,
especially if you're already in,
if you're maybe deploying some static stuff
over CloudFlare or Brazil, yeah,
it's sometimes nice just to be all in on one service.
- Yeah, yeah, it really is.
Let's talk about choosing serverless over other things,
right, you've actually laid out two really good examples,
or maybe three even with the static site example,
but I've got bursts of activity.
- Yeah, that's definitely--
- Right, and really, really low,
incredibly, incredibly low usage other times, right?
- Yeah, yeah, you think of like,
yeah, your Black Friday traffic, right?
Like you, to not have to think of like
how many servers to be provisioned
for something like that, or if you don't know,
I think there's probably some like,
well, I actually know there's been like
some pretty popular articles about people
like leaving the cloud, and yeah,
like if you know your scale and you know,
you know exactly what you need, yeah,
you probably can save money by just having
your own infrastructure set up,
or, but yeah, if you don't know,
or it's very like spiky, you don't need to have a server
that's consuming a lot of power running,
you know, 24 hours a day,
you can just invoke a function as you need, so.
- This portion of Talk Python to Me
is brought to you by Mailtrap,
an email delivery platform that developers love.
An email sending solution with industry best analytics,
SMTP and email API SDKs for major programming languages
and 24/7 human support.
Try for free at mailtrap.io.
- Yeah, there's a super interesting series
by David Heinemeyer Hansen of Ruby on Rails fame
and from Basecamp about how Basecamp has left the cloud
and how they're saving $7 million
and getting better performance over five years.
- Yeah, yeah.
- But that's a big investment, right?
They bought, they paid $600,000 for hardware, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
- Only so many people can do that.
- Right, and you know, you gotta have that running somewhere
that, you know, with backup power and, yeah.
- Yeah, so what they ended up doing for this one
is they went with some service called Geft,
cloud hosting, which is like white glove, white,
so white labeled is the word I'm looking for,
where it just looks like it's your hardware,
but they put it into a mega data center.
And there's, you know, they'll have the hardware shipped
to them and somebody will just come out
and install it into racks and go, here's your IP.
- Right, yeah.
- Like a virtual VM or a VM in a cloud,
but it takes three weeks to boot.
- Right, yeah, yeah.
- Which is kind of the opposite, it's almost,
I'm kind of diving into it because it's almost
the exact opposite of the serverless benefits, right?
This is insane stability.
I have this thing for five years.
We have 4,000 CPUs we've installed
and we're using them for the next five years
rather than how many milliseconds
am I gonna run this code for?
- Right, exactly, yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's definitely the far opposite.
And so, yeah, you kind of, you know,
maybe serverless isn't for every use case,
but it's definitely a nice like tool to have
in the toolbox and yeah, you definitely,
even working in serverless, like if you're,
yeah, eventually you're gonna need like maybe
to interact with the database that's gotta be on
all the time, you know, it's, yeah, there's a lot of,
it's a good tool, but it's definitely not
the one size fits all solution, so.
- Yeah, let's talk databases in a second,
but for, you know, when does it make sense to say,
we're gonna put this, like if let's suppose
I have an API, right, that's a pretty,
an API is a real similar equivalent
to what a serverless thing is, like,
I'm gonna call this API, things gonna happen,
I'm gonna call this function, the thing's gonna happen.
Let's suppose I have an API and it has eight endpoints,
it's written in FastAPI or whatever it is.
It might make sense to have that as serverless, right?
You don't wanna run a server and all that kind of thing.
But what if I have an API with 200 endpoints?
Like, where is the point where like,
there are so many little serverless things,
I don't even know where to look,
they're everywhere, which version is this one?
You know what I mean?
Like, where's that trade off and how do,
you know, you and the people you work with
think about that?
- Yeah, I guess that's a good question.
I mean, as you start like, you know,
getting into these like micro services,
how small do you wanna break these up?
And so there is some different thoughts on that.
Even like a Lambda function, for instance,
if you put this behind an API,
you can use a single Lambda function
for your entire REST API, even if it is,
you know, 200 endpoints.
So- - Okay.
- Yeah. - So you put the whole app there
and then when a request comes in,
it routes to whatever part of your app?
- Theoretically, yeah.
Yeah, so there's a package called Power Tools
for AWS Power Tools.
AWS Lambda Power Tools for Python.
Yeah, I know, yes.
Yeah, I know the similar name.
Yeah, so they have a really good like event resolver.
So you can actually, it almost looks like,
you know, Flask or some of the other Python web frameworks.
And so you can have this resolver,
whether it's, you know, API gateway and in AWS
or different, they have a few different options
for the API itself.
But yeah, in theory, you could have your entire API
behind a single Lambda function,
but then that's probably not optimal, right?
So you're, that's where you have to figure out
how to break that up.
And so, yeah, they do like that same,
the decorators, you know, app.post or, yeah.
Yeah, and your endpoints and you can do the,
with the, have them have variables in there
where maybe you have like ID as your lookup
and it can, you know, slash user slash ID
is going to find your, find, you know, a single user.
So, and their documentation,
they actually address this a little bit.
Like, do you want to do,
they call it either like a micro function pattern
where maybe every single endpoint
has its own Lambda function.
But yeah, that's a lot of overhead to maintain.
If you had, like you said, 200 endpoints,
you have 200 Lambdas.
- You gotta upgrade them all at the same time
so they have the right data models and all that.
Yeah, that's really.
- So yeah, so there's definitely some,
even conflicting views on this.
How micro do you want to go?
And so I was able to go to AWS reInvent in November
and they actually kind of pitched this hybrid.
Maybe like if you take your like CRUD operations, right?
And maybe you have your create, update and delete
all on one Lambda that's with its configuration for those,
but your read is on another Lambda.
So maybe your CRUD operations,
they all interact with a relational database,
but your reader just does like reads from a Dynamo database
where you kind of sync that data up.
And so you could have your permissions kind of separated
for each of those Lambda functions.
And people reading from an API
don't always need the same permissions
as updating, deleting.
And so, yeah, there's a lot of different ways
to break that up and how micro do you go with this?
- Definitely. - How micro can you go?
- Yeah. - Yeah, 'cause it sounds to me
like if you had many, many of them,
then all of a sudden you're back to like,
wait, I did this because I didn't want to be in DevOps
and now I'm different kind of DevOps.
- Yeah, yeah.
So yeah, that Python, that package, the Power Tools
is, does a lot of like heavy lifting for you.
At PyCon, there was a talk on serverless
that the way they described the Power Tools package
was it, they said it like codified
your serverless best practices.
And it's really true.
They give a lot, there's like so many different tools
in there.
There's a logger, like a structured logger
that works really well with Lambda.
And you don't even have to use like the AWS login services.
If you want to use like, you know, Datadog
or Splunk or something else,
it's just a structured logger and how you aggregate them
is like up to you and you can even customize
how you format them.
But it's, works really well with Lambda.
- Yeah, you probably could actually capture exceptions
and stuff with something like Sentry even, right?
- Oh yeah.
- Python code, there's no reason you couldn't.
- Right, exactly.
Yeah.
Yeah, some of that comes into, you know,
packaging up those libraries for that.
You do have to think of some of that stuff,
but like Datadog. - Log this log.
- Yeah.
Yeah, Datadog, for instance,
they provide something called like a Lambda layer
or a Lambda extension,
which is another way to package code up
that just makes it a little bit easier.
So yeah, there's a lot of different ways
to attack some of these problems.
- A lot of that stuff,
even though they have nice libraries for them,
it's really just calling a HTTP endpoint
and you could go, okay, we need something really light.
I don't know if requests is already included,
or, but there's some gotta be some kind of HTTP thing
already included.
We're just gonna directly call it, not.
- Sure.
- And then we'll just do all these packages.
Yeah.
- Yep.
- Yeah.
This code looks nice.
This Power Tools code,
it looks like well-written Python code.
- They do some really amazing stuff
and they bring in a Pydantic too.
So yeah, like being mostly in serverless,
I've never really gotten to use like FastAPI, right?
And leverage Pydantic as much,
but with Power Tools, you really can.
So they'll package up Pydantic for you.
And so you can actually, yeah,
you can have Pydantic models for validation on these.
It's like a Lambda function, for instance,
it always receives an event.
There's always like two arguments to the handler function,
it's event and context.
And like event is always a,
it's a dictionary in Python.
And so they can always look different.
And so, yeah.
So, 'cause the event, yeah.
So if you look in the Power Tools, GitHub, their tests,
they have like, okay, here's what an event from-
- API gateway proxy event.json or whatever, right?
- Yes, yeah.
So they have, yeah, examples.
Yes, yeah.
So like, you don't wanna parse that out by yourself.
- No.
- So they have Pydantic models
or they might actually just be Python data classes,
but that you can say like, okay, yeah,
this function is going to be for, yeah,
an API gateway proxy event,
or it's going to be an S3 event or whatever it is.
You know, there's so many different ways to receive events
from different AWS services.
So, yeah, Power Tools kind of gives you
some nice validation.
And yeah, you might just say like, okay, yeah,
the body of this event,
even though I don't care about all this other stuff
that they include, the path headers,
queer string parameters,
but I just need like the body of this.
So you just say, okay, event.body,
and you can even use, you can validate that further.
The event body is going to be a Pydantic model
that you created, so.
- Yeah, there's a lot of different pieces in here.
If I was working on this
and it didn't already have Pydantic models,
I would take this and go to JSON Pydantic.
- Oh, I didn't even know this existed.
That's weird, okay.
- Boom, put that right in there and boom, there you go.
It parses it onto a nested tree, object tree of the model.
- Very nice, yeah.
- But if they already give it to you,
they already give it to you,
then just take what they give you, but.
- Yeah, those specific events might be data classes
instead of Pydantic, just because you don't,
that way you don't have to package Pydantic
up in your Lambda.
But yeah, if you're already figuring out a way
to package Power Tools,
you're close enough that you probably
just include Pydantic too, but.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, and they also,
I think they just added this feature
where it'll actually generate OpenAPI schema for you.
I think, yeah, FastAPI does that as well, right?
So, yeah, so that's something you can leverage Power Tools
to do now as well.
- So, excellent, and then you can actually
take the OpenAPI schema and generate a Python.
- Client board on top of that, I think.
- Yeah, yeah.
- So you just, it's robots all the way down.
- Right, yeah.
- All the way down.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, I haven't used those OpenAPI generated clients
very much.
I was always skeptical of them, but yeah, in theory.
- I just feel heartless, or soulless, I guess,
is the word, like, boring.
It's just like, okay, here's another star org,
star star KW orgs thing, where it's like,
couldn't you just write, make some reasonable defaults
and give me some keyword argument, you know,
just like, it's all top field.
But if it's better than nothing, you know,
it's better than nothing.
- Right, yeah, yeah.
So, but yeah, you can see like Power Tools,
they took a lot of influence from FastAPI and--
- It does seem like it, yeah, for sure.
- Yeah, yeah.
So it's definitely really powerful
and you get some of those same benefits.
- Yeah, this is new to me, it looks quite nice.
So another comment by Kim is,
tended to use serverless functions for either things
that run briefly, like once a month on a schedule,
or the code that processes stuff coming in on an AWS SQS,
simple queuing service, queue of unknown schedule.
So maybe that's an interesting segue
into how do you call your serverless code?
- Yeah, yeah.
So as we kind of touched on,
there's a lot of different ways from like, you know,
AWS, for instance, to do it.
So yeah, like AWS Lambda has like Lambda function URLs,
but I haven't used those as much.
But if you just look at like the different options
and like power tools, for instance,
you can have a load balancer that's gonna,
where you set the endpoint to invoke a Lambda,
you can have API gateway,
which is another service they have.
So there's a lot of different ways, yeah, SQS.
So that's kind of almost getting into like a way
of like streaming or an asynchronous way of processing data.
So yeah, maybe in AWS, you're using a queue, right?
That's filling up and you say like, okay, yeah,
every time this queue is at this size or this timeframe,
invoke this Lambda and process all these messages.
So there's a lot of different ways
to invoke a Lambda function.
So if it's, I mean, really as simple as you can invoke them
like from the AWS CLI or,
but yeah, most people are probably
have some kind of API around it.
- Yeah, yeah, almost make them look like just HTTP endpoints.
- Right, yeah.
- Yeah, Mark out there says,
not heard talk of ECS, I don't think,
but I've been running web services
using Fargate serverless tasks on ECS for years now.
Are you familiar with this?
I haven't done it.
- Yeah, I'm like vaguely familiar with it,
but yeah, this is like a serverless,
yeah, serverless compute for containers.
So I haven't used this personally,
but yeah, very like similar concept
where it kind of scales up for you.
And yeah, you don't have to have things running
all the time, but yeah, it can be Dockerized applications.
Now, in fact, the company I work for now,
they do this with their Ruby on Rails applications.
They Dockerize them and run with Fargate.
So.
- Creating Docker containers of these things,
the less familiar you are with running that tech stack,
the better it is in Docker, you know what I mean?
- Yeah, yeah.
- Like I could run straight Python,
but if it's Ruby on Rails or PHP,
maybe it's going into a container.
That would make me feel a little bit better about it.
- Yeah, especially if you're in that workflow
of like handing something over to a DevOps team, right?
Like you can say like, here's an image or a container
or a Docker file that will work for you.
That's maybe a little bit easier
than trying to explain how to set up
an environment or something, so.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, Fargate's a really good serverless option too.
- Excellent.
What about performance?
You know, you talked about having like a whole API apps,
like FastAPI, Flask or whatever.
- Yeah.
- The startup of those apps can be somewhat,
can be non-trivial basically.
And so then on the other side, we've got databases and stuff.
And one of the bits of magic of databases
is the connection pooling that happens, right?
So the first connection might take 500 milliseconds,
but the next one takes one.
As it's already open effectively, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
That's definitely something you really have to take
into consideration is like how much you can do.
That's where some of that like observability,
some of like the tracing that you can do
and profiling is really powerful.
Yeah, AWS Lambda, for instance,
they have something called cold starts.
So like, yeah.
So the first time like a Lambda gets invoked
or maybe you have 10 Lambdas that get called
at the same time, that's gonna, you know,
invoke 10 separate Lambda functions.
So that's like great for the scale, right?
That's really nice.
But on a cold start,
it's usually a little bit slower invocation
because it has to initialize.
Like I think what's happening, you know,
behind the scenes is they're like,
they're moving your code over that's gonna get executed.
And anything that happens like outside
of your handler function, so importing libraries,
sometimes you're establishing a database connection.
Maybe you're, you know, loading some environment variables
or some, you know, secrets.
And so, yeah, there's definitely,
performance is something to consider.
Yeah, that's probably, you mentioned Rust.
Yeah, there's probably some more performant,
like runtimes for some of these serverless functions.
So I've even heard some people say, okay,
for like client facing things,
we're not gonna use serverless.
Like we just want that performance.
So that cold start definitely can,
that can have an impact on you.
- Yeah, on both ends that I've pointed out.
The app start, but also the service,
the database stuff with like the connection.
- Right, yeah, so yeah, relational databases too.
That's an interesting thing.
- Yeah, what do you guys do?
You mentioned Dynamo already.
- Yeah, so Dynamo really performant
for a lot of connections, right?
But a, so Dynamo is a, you know, serverless database
that can scale, you can query it over and over
and that's not going to,
it doesn't reuse a connection in the same way
that like a SQL database would.
So that's an excellent option,
but if you do have to connect to a relational database
and you have a lot of invocations,
you can use a, like a proxy,
if you're all in on AWS.
And so again, sorry for this is really AWS heavy,
but if you're using their like
relational database service, RDS,
you can use RDS proxy,
which will use like a pool of connections
for your Lambda function.
- Oh, interesting.
- So that can, yeah,
that can give you a lot of performance
or at least you won't be, you know,
running out of connections to your database.
So another thing too,
is just how you structure that connection.
So I mentioned cold Lambdas,
you obviously have warm Lambdas too.
So a Lambda has its handler function.
And so anything outside of the handler function
can get reused on a warm Lambda.
So you can establish the connection to a database
and it'll get reused on every invocation that it can.
- That's cool.
Do you have to do anything explicit to make it do that?
Or is that just a...
- It just has to be outside of that handler function.
So, you know, kind of at your top level of your file.
So, yeah.
- Excellent, yeah.
It makes me think almost one thing you would consider
is like profiling the import statement almost, right?
- Yeah.
- That's what we normally do,
but there's a library called import profiler
that actually lets you time how long
different things take to import.
It could take a while,
especially if you come from,
not from a native Python way of thinking
in like C# or C++ or something.
You say hash include or using such and such,
like that's a compiler type thing that really has no cost.
- Yeah.
- But there's code execution
when you import something in Python
and some of these can take a while, right?
- Yes, yeah.
So there's a lot of tools for that.
There's some, I think even maybe specific for Lambda.
I know like Datadog has a profiler
that gives you like this,
I forget what the graphic is called.
Like a flame graph. - Flame graph?
- A flame graph, yeah.
That'll give you like a flame graph and show like,
okay, yeah, it took this long
to make your database connection,
this long to import Pydantic.
And it took this long to make a call to DynamoDB,
you know, so you can actually kind of like break that up.
AWS has X-Ray, I think, which does something similar too.
So yeah, it's definitely something to consider.
Another, just what you're packaging
is definitely something to watch for.
And so I mentioned, yeah,
I mentioned using Pants to package Lambdas
and they do, hopefully I don't butcher
how this works behind the scenes,
but they're using Rust
and they'll actually kind of like infer
your dependencies for you.
And so they have an integration with AWS Lambda.
They also have it for Google Cloud Functions.
So yeah, it'll go through,
you say, here's like my AWS Lambda function.
This is the file for it
and the function that needs to be called.
And it's gonna create a zip file for you
that has your Lambda code in it.
And it's gonna find all those dependencies you need.
So it'll actually, by default,
it's gonna include like Bodo that you need.
If you're using Bodo,
if you're gonna use,
PyMySQL or whatever library,
it's gonna pull all those in and zip that up for you.
And so if you just like open up that zip and you see,
especially if you're sharing code across your code base,
maybe you have a shared function
to make some of these database connections or calls.
Like you see everything that's gonna go in there.
And so, yeah.
And so how like Pants does it is it's file-based.
So sometimes just for like ease of imports,
you might throw a lot of stuff in like your init.py file
and say like, okay, yeah, from,
you know, you add all,
kind of bubble up all your things
that you want to import in there.
Well, if one of those imports is also using OpenCV,
and you don't need that,
then Pants is gonna say like, oh, he's importing this.
And because it's file-based,
now this Lambda needs OpenCV,
which is a massive package that's going to,
it's going to impact your performance,
especially in those cold starts.
'Cause that code has to be moved over.
So. - Yeah.
That's pretty interesting.
So kind of an alternative to saying,
here's my requirements or my pyproject.toml.
- A lock file or whatever. - Yeah.
- That just lists everything the entire program might use.
This could say, you're gonna import this function.
And to do that, it imports these things,
which import those things.
And then it just says, okay,
that means here's what you need, right?
- Right, yeah.
Yeah, it's definitely one of like the best ways
that I've found to package up Lambda functions.
I think some of the other tooling might do some of this too,
but yeah, a lot of times it would require
like requirements.txt.
But if you have like a large code base too,
where maybe you do have this shared module for that,
maybe you have 30 different Lambda functions
that are all going to use some kind of helper function.
It's just gonna go and like grab that.
And it doesn't have to be like pip installable.
Pants is smart enough to just be like,
okay, it needs this code.
And so, but yeah, you just have to be careful.
Yeah, yeah.
And there's so many other cool things that Pants is doing
that they have some really nice stuff for testing
and linting and formatting.
And it's, yeah, there's a lot of really good stuff
that they're doing.
- Yeah, I had Benji on the show to talk about Pants.
That was fun.
- Yeah.
- So let me go back to this picture.
Is this the picture?
I have a lot of things open on my screen now.
There.
So on my server setup that I described,
which is a bunch of Docker containers
running on one big machine,
I can go in there and I can say,
tail this log and see all the traffic
to all the different containers.
I can tail another log and just see like the logging,
log book, log guru, whatever output of that,
or just web traffic.
Like there's different ways to just go.
I'm just gonna sit back and look at it for a minute.
Make sure it's chilling, right?
If everything's so transient, not so easy in the same way.
So what do you do?
- Yeah.
So yeah, Power Tools does,
they have their structured logger that helps a lot.
But yeah, you have to kind of like
aggregate these logs somewhere, right?
Because yeah, you can't, you know,
a Lambda function you can't like SSH into, right?
So yeah.
- You can't, it's gonna take too long.
- Yeah, yeah.
So yeah, you need to have some way to aggregate these.
So like AWS has CloudWatch where that will like by default
kind of log all of your standard out.
So even like a print statement would go to CloudWatch
just by default.
But you probably wanna like structure these better
with most likely and, you know, JSON format,
just most tooling around those is going to help you.
So yeah, the Power Tools structured logger is really good.
And you can even like,
you can have like a single log statement,
but you can append different keys to it.
And it's pretty powerful,
especially 'cause you don't wanna like,
I think like, so if you just like printed something
in a Lambda function, for instance,
that's gonna be like a different row on each of your,
like by like the default CloudWatch,
like it'll be, how it breaks it up is really odd
unless you have some kind of structure to them.
- Okay. - And so, yeah.
So definitely something to consider.
Something else you can do is, yeah,
there's metrics you can do.
So like how it works with like CloudWatch,
they have a specific format.
And if you use that format, you can,
it'll automatically pull that in as a metric.
And like Datadog has something similar
where you can actually kind of like go in there.
You can look at your logs and say like,
find a value and be like, I want this to be a metric now.
And so that's really powerful.
- Oh, the metric sounds cool.
So I see logging and tracing.
What's the difference between those things?
Like to me, tracing is a level,
just a high level of logging.
- Yeah, tracing,
and hopefully I do the justice differentiated too.
I feel like tracing does have a lot more
to do with your performance
or maybe even closer to like tracking
some of these metrics, right?
I've used the Datadog tracer a lot
and I've used the AWS like X-ray,
their tracing utility a little bit too.
And so like those will show you.
So like maybe you are reaching out to a database,
writing to S3. - Almost like a APM
application performance monitoring
where it says you spent this much time in a SQL query
and this much time in identic serialization.
Whereas the logging would say,
a user has been sent a message.
- Right, exactly.
Yeah, yeah.
Tracing definitely is probably more around your performance
and yeah, things like that.
- It's kind of insane that they can do that.
You see it in the Django debug tool
or in the pyramid debug tool,
but they'll be like, here's your code
and here's all your SQL queries
and here's how long they took.
And you're just like, wow,
that thing is reaching deep down in there.
- The Datadog one is very interesting
because like it just knows like
that this is a SQL connection
and it tells you like, oh, okay,
this SQL connection took this long.
And it was like, I didn't tell it to even trace that.
Like it just like, it knows really well.
Yeah, so like the expectation.
- It's one thing to know a SQL connection is open,
it's another to say,
and here's what it sent over SSL by the way.
Like how'd you get in there?
- Yeah, yeah.
So especially.
- It's in process so it can do a lot.
It is impressive to see those things that work.
All right, so that's probably
what the tracing is about, right?
- Yes, yeah, yeah.
Definitely probably more around performance.
You can put some different things in tracing too.
Like I've used it to say like,
we talked about those like database connections to say like,
oh yeah, this is reusing a connection here.
'Cause I was trying to like debug some stuff on,
am I creating a connection too many times
so I don't wanna be?
So yeah, you can put some other useful things
in tracing as well.
- Yeah, and Pat out in the audience.
Oops, I'm moving around.
When using many microservices,
like single execution involves many services basically,
it's hard to follow the logs between the services
and tracing helps tie that together.
- Yeah, yeah, that's for sure.
- All right, let's close this out, Tony,
with one more thing that I'm not sure
how constructive it can be.
There probably is some ways, but testing, right?
- Yeah, yeah, that's definitely.
- If you could set up your own Lambda cluster,
you might just run that for yourself, right?
So how are you gonna do this, right?
- Yeah, to some extent you can, right?
Like there's a Lambda Docker image
that you could run locally and you can do that.
But if your Lambda is reaching out to DynamoDB,
I guess there's technically a DynamoDB container as well.
Like you could, it's a lot of overhead to set this up,
but rather than just doing like, you know, flask start
or, you know, whatever the command is to like spin up
a flask server. - I pressed the go button
in my IDE and now it's.
- Yeah, so that's definitely,
and there's more and more tooling coming out,
you know, that's coming out for this kind of stuff.
But if you can like unit test,
there's no reason you can't just like, you know,
run unit tests locally.
But when you start getting into the integration test,
you're probably getting to the point where
maybe you just deploy to actual services.
And, you know, it's always trade-offs, right?
Like there's costs associated with it.
There's the overhead of like, okay,
how can I deploy to an isolated environment?
But maybe it interacts with another microservice.
So yeah, so there's definitely trade-offs,
but testing is. - I can see that you might
come up with like a QA environment,
almost like a mirror image that doesn't share any data.
- Yeah. - But it's sufficiently close,
but then you're running, I mean,
that's a pretty big commitment 'cause you're running
a whole replica of whatever you have.
- Right, yeah.
And so yeah, QA environments are great,
but you might even want lower than QA.
You might want to have a dev or like a,
one place I worked at,
we would spin up an entire environment for every PR.
So you could actually, yeah, like when you created a PR,
that environment got spun up
and it ran your integration tests and system tests
against that environment, which, you know,
simulated your prod environment a little bit better
than running locally on your machine.
So certainly a challenge to test this.
- Yeah, I can imagine that it is.
- Yeah, and there's always these like one-off things too,
right, like you can't really simulate
like that memory limitation of a Lambda locally,
you know, as much as when you deploy it
and things like that, so.
- Yeah, yeah.
That would be much, much harder.
Maybe you could run a Docker container
and put a memory limit on it, you know, that might work.
- Yeah, yeah, maybe.
- You're back into like more and more DevOps
to avoid DevOps.
- Right, yeah, yeah.
- So there it goes, but interesting.
All right, well, anything else you wanna add
to this conversation before we wrap it up?
About out of time here.
- Yeah, I guess, I don't know if I have it,
hopefully we covered enough.
There's just a lot of like good,
yeah, there's a lot of good resources.
The tooling that I've mentioned,
like Power Tools and Pants, just amazing communities.
Like Power Tools has a Discord,
and you can go on there and ask for help,
and they're super helpful.
Pants has a Slack channel, you can join their Slack
and ask, you know, about things.
And so those two communities have been really good
and really helpful in this.
A lot of good talks that are available on YouTube too.
So just, yeah, there's definitely resources out there
and a lot of people have, you know,
fought this for a while, so.
- Yeah, excellent.
And you don't have to start from just create a function
and start typing.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Cool, all right, well, before you get out of here though,
let's get your recommendation for a PyPI package.
Something notable, something fun.
- I probably, you know, we've talked a lot about it,
but Power Tools is definitely one
that is like everyday getting used for me.
So the, yeah, Power Tools for Lambda and Python,
they actually support other languages too.
So they have like the same functionality for like,
you know, Node.js, you know, for like TypeScript and .NET.
And so, yeah, but this one definitely
leveraging Power Tools and Pydantic together,
just really made like a serverless, a lot of fun to write.
So yeah, definitely doing great things there.
- Excellent, well, I'll put all those things
in the show notes and it's been great to talk to you.
Thanks for sharing your journey down the serverless path.
- Yep, thanks for having me.
- You bet.
- Yeah, enjoy chatting.
- Same, bye.
This has been another episode of Talk Python to Me.
Thank you to our sponsors.
Be sure to check out what they're offering.
It really helps support the show.
Take some stress out of your life.
Get notified immediately about errors and performance issues
in your web or mobile applications with Sentry.
Just visit talkpython.fm/sentry and get started for free.
And be sure to use the promo code,
Talk Python, all one word.
Mailtrap, an email delivery platform that developers love.
Try for free at mailtrap.io.
Want to level up your Python?
We have one of the largest catalogs
of Python video courses over at Talk Python.
Our content ranges from true beginners
to deeply advanced topics like memory and async.
And best of all, there's not a subscription in sight.
Check it out for yourself at training.talkpython.fm.
Be sure to subscribe to the show.
Open your favorite podcast app and search for Python.
We should be right at the top.
You can also find the iTunes feed at /itunes,
the Google Play feed at /play,
and the direct RSS feed at /rss on talkpython.fm.
We're live streaming most of our recordings these days.
If you want to be part of the show
and have your comments featured on the air,
be sure to subscribe to our YouTube channel
at talkpython.fm/youtube.
This is your host, Michael Kennedy.
Thanks so much for listening.
I really appreciate it.
Now get out there and write some Python code.
(upbeat music)
Thank you for watching.